# Mickelsen et al 2020 scRNA-seq of the Ventroposterior Hypothalamus

This repository accompanies the preprint [L.E. Mickelsen, W.F. Flynn, et
al.][biorxiv-preprint].

> Laura E Mickelsen, William F Flynn, Kristen Springer, Lydia Wilson, Eric J
> Beltrami, Mohan Bolisetty,  Paul F Robson, Alexander C Jackson. "Cellular
> taxonomy and spatial organization of the murine ventral posterior
> hypothalamus." (2020)

## Current Status

-   Manuscript: [public][biorxiv-preprint]
-   Raw Data: [embargoed][geo-link]
-   Figure code: public (here!)
-   Analysis code: public-ish. 
-   Finalized h5ad files: [embargoed][ftp-link]
-   Finalized Loupe Cell Browser files: [embargoed][ftp-link]

*Note on analysis code*:  The original analysis code makes heavy use of a custom
wrapper around Scanpy 1.3.7 that can be found [here][scanpy-recipes].  This
version of the code is largely readable but not functional unless you install
`scanpy_recipes`.  In order to make this work more accessible, I am porting the
analysis code to Scanpy 1.4.5+ but this is a work in progres.

## Sample descriptions

Ventral posterior hypothalamus microdissections were harvested from four (4)
batches of three (3) mice.  Two batches were harvested at a time, one male
batch and one female batch:

| LibraryID | Batch | Strain | Age | Sex | Harvest | Time of Harvest | Chemistry Version |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| AJ18003 | 1 | C57BL/6 | P30-35 | Male | 1 | March 2018 | v2 |
| AJ18004 | 2 | C57BL/6 | P30-35 | Female | 1 | March 2018 | v2 |
| AJ19001 | 3 | C57BL/6 | P30-35 | Female | 2 | March 2019 | v3 |
| AJ19002 | 4 | C57BL/6 | P30-35 | Male | 2 | March 2019 | v3 |

## Combined data

You can interactively analyze the resulting aggregated data using the [10X
Loupe Browser][loupe-link] by downloading `.cloupe` files we've prepared using
our datasets.  Those data will be available for download here:
```
ftp://ftp.jax.org/flynnb/mickelsen-vph-2020/loupe.zip
```

We have provided 3 Loupe files for the aggregated global clustering, neuronal
sub-clustering, and non-neuronal subclustering.

When using the Loupe files, note the following:
-   As of March 2020, all Loupe files will contain ***default t-SNE and UMAP
    embeddings as well as default K-means and Graph-based clustering*** that was
    generated by 10X's cellranger tool.  It is currently impossible to remove
    these entries from the Loupe file.  

-   To circumvent these, we have added our UMAP embedding under the name
    "CustomUMAP" and our clustering under the name "Custom Clustering".  Please
    refer to these when trying to correlate the Loupe file with results
    presented in the manuscript.


## Overview of the analysis

## Analysis code

Most of the original analysis was done with Scanpy v1.3.7.  However, I have
updated the majority of the analysis to be compatible with Scanpy v1.4+.
Currently finishing that effort up now.

## Reproducing manuscript figures

The manuscript figures were generated as individual panels which were then
combined in Adobe Illustrator.  However, the individual panels showing scRNA-seq
can be regenerated using notebooks in `notebooks/` and associated utility
scripts.  You can view those directly here:

-   [Main figures][main-notebook]
-   [SI figures][si-notebook]
-   [Extra figures][extra-notebook]

### Requirements

Full requirements are listed in the `environment.yaml` file, but for the most
part, the following Python 3.6+ packages are needed.

```bash
scanpy
numpy
pandas
scikit-learn
matplotlib
seaborn
cmocean
```

### Downloading data

Some of the data is too large to host on GitHub.  Download the data directly
via your web browser (ftp://ftp.jax.org/flynnb/mickelsen-vph-2020/) or use the
command line:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:TheJacksonLaboratory/ventroposterior-hypothalamus-scrna-seq.git
cd ventroposterior-hypothalamus-scrna-seq/data
wget ftp://ftp.jax.org/flynnb/mickelsen-vph-2020/h5ad.zip
unzip h5ad.zip
```

### Running the notebooks

```bash
jupyter notebook notebooks/main_figures.ipynb
jupyter notebook notebooks/si_figures.ipynb
jupyter notebook notebooks/extra_figures.ipynb
```


[loupe-link]: https://support.10xgenomics.com/spatial-gene-expression/software/downloads/latest
[ftp-link]: ftp://ftp.jax.org/flynnb/mickelsen-vph-2020/
[ftp-loupe-link]: ftp://ftp.jax.org/flynnb/mickelsen-vph-2020/loupe.zip
[main-notebook]: https://github.com/TheJacksonLaboratory/ventroposterior-hypothalamus-scrna-seq/blob/master/notebooks/main_figures.ipynb
[si-notebook]: https://github.com/TheJacksonLaboratory/ventroposterior-hypothalamus-scrna-seq/blob/master/notebooks/si_figures.ipynb
[extra-notebook]: https://github.com/TheJacksonLaboratory/ventroposterior-hypothalamus-scrna-seq/blob/master/notebooks/extra_figures.ipynb
[biorxiv-preprint]: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.14.096818
[geo-link]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE146692
[scanpy-recipes]: https://github.com/TheJacksonLaboratory/scanpy_recipes
